short shelf-life of vegetables has been associated with a series of foodborne illness outbreaks
chlorine, electrolyzed water and hydrogen peroxide

Chlorine has been extensively used in the food
industry as sodium hypochlorite in aqueous formulations
and different operations such as washing and spraying,
acting effectively on foodborne pathogens and
maintaining the overall quality of treated product’s shelflife

In the past decades, consumer
awareness, regarding health and food safety issues
initiated by the use of food synthetic additives, has
extensively increased. The increasing demand for natural
food additives as a substitute for chemical disinfectants
has driven the industry towards the development and
application of more sustainable technologies for
preserving vegetable safety and quality

The non-thermal technologies of ultraviolet-C (UVC) radiation and ozonation have been studied as
replacements for surface decontamination of fruits and
vegetables, and are considered highly efficient, nontoxic, and environment-friendly.

The UV-C radiation is
generated at wavelengths of 250-280 nm and has been
reported to disrupt the functionality and integrity of
microorganisms’ DNA along with the generation of
reactive oxygen species that regulate physiological
processes to induce secondary metabolite production

 Since
1997, ozone has gained the Generally Recognized as
Safe (GRAS) status for direct contact with foods. In June
2001, gaseous and aqueous O3 was approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) as an
antimicrobial additive for direct contact with foods
(Code of Federal Regulations, 2001).

In the European
Union, the application of O3 in food processing
commenced in the early 1900s after its first use for water
treatment. The European Council of Ministers has
adopted the proposal of permitting the O3 treatment of
natural mineral water. In 2019, the French Food Safety
Authority (Agence Nationale de Sécurité Sanitaire
(ANSES), 2019) recommended the use of O3 in water, as
a disinfectant in the washing of ready-to-use salads. 

Chinchkar et al. (2022) reviewed many of the
sanitizers and disinfectants of fresh fruits and vegetables,
presenting their working principles, applications,
effectiveness, cons and pros and the related legislation
issued by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(USFDA) and the European Food Safety Authority
(EFSA) regarding the physical and chemical disinfection
technologies (chlorine, chlorine dioxide, O3,
peroxyacetic acid, hydrogen peroxide, trisodium
phosphate, organic acids such as lactic acid, ascorbic,
acetic acid, citric acid and tartaric acid, electrolyzed
water, ionizing radiation such as gamma rays, x-rays, ebeams. and ultrasound) and their effectiveness for the
shelf-life extension of fresh produce.

Chemical
disinfection technologies (chlorine dioxide, O3,
electrolyzed water, organic acid) are promising
substitutes, dealing with the rigorous food safety and
shelf-life demands (Chinchkar et al., 2022). The chlorine
application has been banned in some countries due to

human health and environmental raised issues.
Chinchkar et al. (2022) reported that market preference
has been shifted to chlorine dioxide and other chemicals
and added that the novel chemicals in combination with
reliable regulatory policies could successfully decline the
rate of contamination in fruits and vegetables

 Physical
technologies such as ultrasound and ionizing radiation
are referred to, as gentle pasteurization modes that are
effective in microbial load reduction with minimal
effects on sensory and nutritional profiles. Concluding,
Chinchkar et al. (2022) highlighted the need for further
research regarding the combined preservation techniques
that might lead to promising approaches for
microbiological safety.

The efficacy of O3 as a disinfectant is affected by a
number of intrinsic factors (food product: fruit and
vegetable type, volume/mass, surface characteristics,
available water; microbial load: microbial strains
characteristics, the physical state of bacterial strains,
natural microflora, artificially inoculated
microorganisms, population size) and extrinsic factors
(water quality: pH, organic matter, pressure, and
temperature, air quality: relative humidity and ozone
treatment: concentration and dosages)

The benefits of
O3 application in the gaseous phase to sustain the quality
of stored lettuce are based on O3 molecules that have a
longer half-life in the air than in an aqueous solution and
a higher diffusion rate (Sarron et al., 2021). Although
research regarding the UV-C and ozonation as
disinfection treatments can be found in literature,
insufficient information is provided on what degree and
in which way the main quality characteristics (mass loss,
colour, texture and respiration rate) of fresh-cut lettuce
are affected especially if the variable combination of
them is employed, to extend the beneficial effects on
fresh and fresh-cut vegetables such as lettuce. 

